British surgeon doctor Nick
Maynard is just back from Gaza,
where he saw the collapsing health
care system with his own eyes.
He left Rafah
just before Israel's offensive began,
and he's joining me here
now in the studio.
Doctor Maynard, welcome to the program.
Thank you very much for asking me.
I'm you left and I'm just going to
read what you said
because you left
just as the Israeli incursion began.
You told Reuters that you heard bombs
and gunfire all over
driving through Rafah.
The tension was palpable with people
evacuating as rapidly as they could.
You saw some of that attempt
to evacuate in Jeremy's package.
There.
What did you see?
And what is the status of people
who just want to get out of the way?
So they issued
the initial evacuation orders
about two hours
before we left for the crossing,
and we saw hundreds of people
rushing out of their
I was going to say houses.
They're not houses.
Of course,
these people have been displaced
many times.
So they were leaving their very temporary
shelters, their
makeshift tents, their tarps in shelters,
gathering their belongings
together, going in cars,
some of them walking,
some of them going on a cart
with donkeys and rushing out. And it was
very distressing to see them
leaving so urgently
because that this for some of them,
this is the fifth, sixth or seventh time
they've done that in the last six months.
You were leaving as well.
What was it like for you? Is it?
I mean,
did you get you obviously out safely,
but was it
dangerous as you were trying to get out?
So we
we didn't
think we were going to get that.
We were initially turned away.
So we went back to the temple.
What we were advised to leave.
So there was ongoing
discussions between
the the medical aid,
the Palestinian ground staff
and CogAT, the liaison part of the IDF.
And so they initially decided
for security reasons,
we should go back to the house.
But then we left again late morning,
got to the crossing
as the bombings were intensifying.
So we were surrounded by bombs
going off really virtually nonstop.
And there was very difficult decisions
to be made
about whether we should carry on with our
planned departure
or whether we should turn around,
because it was getting too dangerous.
But we did stay
and we managed to get out.
you were
warned in March, actually,
before the Rafah operation
started, certainly before,
you know that
if a ground invasion happened,
a ground incursion of some sort,
it would be apocalyptic.
And Gaza's health ministry
said in a statement
now, particularly after the Sunday
attack, there is no hospital in Rafah
with enough capacity
to take this number
of killed and injured,
causing confusion amongst
ambulance teams
on where to transfer them.
Give us a layout of what
hospitals remain,
what don't anywhere near by these places
that are, you know, under IDF attack.
So? So Rafah is a small town.
It has a population of 1
to 200,000 people,
normally as
it has two hospitals, one government
hospital, another hospital
which normally has a capacity
of about 60 beds,
and a small hospital
called the Shetty Hospital,
which has been in the news
a lot in the last few days,
which has a capacity
normally of 15 one five beds.
So they have very limited beds.
They've got a bigger hospital
between Rafah and Hand, Unesco,
the European Gaza Hospital,
which I've worked
in a lot over the years,
which is surrounded
by the Israeli ground forces,
as very difficult
for patients to get that.
So effectively,
there are no hospitals for these patients
to go to.
There are some field
hospitals have been set up,
but the number of acute beds
available to take these patients is very,
very few.
And have you been in touch
with any colleagues
in the medical profession
or anybody in Rafah
since you've left,
particularly in the last few days? Yeah.
I mean,
I spoke yesterday
to a dear friend of mine
who's an operating theater nurse
who almost to the day a year ago,
I was operating within the theaters
in European Gaza Hospital.
She stayed in Rafah.
She and her husband are living there.
They don't want to leave.
And she said to me yesterday
she would rather die,
and she expects to die in her home.
And she's not going to leave.
I haven't been able to
get hold of her today
and she hasn't answered any message,
so I don't know what's happened to her.
Half a family has been killed
in the last few months.
I've got a close friend
who's a doctor who's out there,
and I've been speaking to them regularly.
But the the the words we used a few weeks
ago of this being apocalyptic,
it absolutely is.
There are many people being killed.
There are those that have been evacuated,
have been forced to go to Al Malaki,
which is an area I know well.
There are already hundreds
of thousands of people there.
They've had to accommodate
nearly a million extra people.
And there is nothing.
There almost is a thin stretch of sand
and wasteland divided by a
road with no facilities at all.
So the idea that you can accommodate it
in any sort of safe way, another million
people, is, is fanciful.
You're a doctor, you're a surgeon,
and you've worked in Gaza for
for some ten years.
You've been going back and forth
through other wars, presumably.
I want to ask you this
because you saw
in Jeremy
Diamond's report
that they saw the weapons,
they were described as slightly less,
huge and powerful,
perhaps to try to mitigate
civilian damage.
These are American made weapons.
but from a doctor's
point of view, particularly as he said,
Jeremy, in a in a densely populated zone,
a light weapon, a light bomb,
a heavy bomb is going to create
a huge amount of civilian destruction.
What would you
what can you say about the weapons
that are used to
Gaza has got a population of 2.2 million.
It is the most densely
populated place in the world.
I was there last May operating.
I'm a cancer surgeon.
I was operating on cancer patients,
part of the Map program,
and it was the last big bombardment
before October the 7th beginning of May.
And I was stuck there.
They closed the borders
and we had to be evacuated eventually.
But I witnessed for four days
this nonstop bombardment,
and it was an incredible demonstration
of how precise
the bombing can be
when the Israeli Defense Force
want to do that.
They were targeting
specific rooms
and building specific floors,
and there was collateral damage
but minimal collateral damage
at that time.
So I've witnessed
firsthand how precise their targeting
can be.
Move forward to post October the 7th.
I was there over Christmas and New Year,
and I witnessed
I watched
the indiscriminate bombing
of large
populations in the surrounding camps
in Daryl Balad,
where I was staying for two weeks.
So I've witnessed two extremes.
I've seen how precision,
how precise their targeting can be,
and I've seen
how indiscriminate it's going to be.
And there's no doubt in my mind
that what we've seen since October
the 7th is indiscriminate
killing of large populations, civilian
large populations.
You know, they deny that every time.
And they say over and over again
that we are doing our best
to minimize civilian.
And they say, what do you expect if
the Hamas terrorist
organization, as they say
they're fighting,
is using human shields,
is using Gazans to
to shield themselves
from any kind of retaliation or action?
What do you say about that?
Well, I've I've not witnessed that.
I think if it's difficult for me
to understand
how anyone can claim that
killing 35 civilians is a proportionate
response to, to, to to events earlier,
but you mean 35,000 35,000 people?
I've not witnessed
what they've describing.
And perhaps more importantly than that,
my friends and colleagues
who I have spoken to daily
since October
the 7th, have lived out there
with them for several weeks
and then do not
provide any evidence to support that.
They would say that they're there.
They live in these,
whatever the underground
or in buildings or whatever.
That's what they would say.
But it's interesting
what you said about witnessing
very targeted
and witnessing something
that's much less targeted.
I want to ask you specific
specifically in your,
you know, your your domain
about the health, system.
I mean, I can just read you
and you'll tell me much more.
I mean, Kamel at one hospital, you know,
dozens of medical staff
is taken to an undisclosed location.
Location? That was in December last year.
The IDF says takes
all feasible precautions
to mitigate harm, etc..
Nasser Hospital, February of this year.
70 health care workers
in the medical complex arrested
by Israeli forces,
80 patients transferred out.
They said they had apprehended
hundreds of Hamas militants.
Al-Shifa hospital.
We know what's happened.
There is completely, a ruin.
They said they were going after
Hamas targets underneath and tunnels.
did you ever come across
anything suspicious?
Did you ever ask any of your
actually the directors of the hospitals,
the people who would be there
when you're not there,
whether there was any threat from,
you know, a militant group
using their premises?
I did,
and I can only really vouch
for what I have witnessed.
And what close friends and colleagues
have said.
I've been in these hospitals
on many occasions,
before October the 7th, but also since
then I have never witnessed.
I've never seen any evidence of Hamas
militants in these hospitals.
And my close friends and colleagues,
some of whom I've known
for nearly 15 years,
I've asked them repeatedly,
and they've never witnessed any of this.
Now, clearly,
I cannot
provide any evidence of what goes on in
any tunnels underneath.
I've never seen them.
But if you take Shifa Hospital
as an example, which I know very well, I.
I've been to every square
inch that hospital.
I've never seen
any restricted access at all
to any parts of the hospitals.
So I've seen no evidence
of what they describe.